Contribution guidelines (#2726)
quinn-rs/quinn: CONTRIBUTING.md

explaining the relevance and implications of the context. Do not share long snippets.

AI is useful when communicating as a non-native English speaker. If you are using AI to edit your
comments for this purpose, please take the time to ensure it reflects your own voice and ideas.
When using AI for translation, we recommend writing in your native language and including the AI
translation in a quote block.

## Code changes

Some ideas and guidelines for contributions:

- For large features, file an issue prior to starting work.
  This means everyone can see what is in progress prior to a PR.
- Feel free to submit a PR even if the work is not totally finished, for early feedback.
- Prefer not to reference GitHub issue or PR numbers in commit messages.
- Try to keep code formatting commits separate from functional commits.

## Commit history

We prefer to keep the commit history clean and easy to follow. As such, we prefer small commits
that do one thing. In particular:

* Avoid mixing refactoring and functional changes in the same commit if possible
* Make mechanical changes (like renaming or moving code around) in a separate commit

> * Isolate updates to `Cargo.lock` in their own commits

Reviewer: Should we also mention amending/squashing/rebasing PR commits in response to feedback?

Author: Added a sentence about this.

Our default workflow is to rebase clean commit history from a PR to `main`.

## Testing

PRs which cause test failures or a significant coverage decrease are unlikely to be accepted.

## Style guide

### Ordering

#### Top-down ordering within modules

Within a module, we prefer to order items top-down. This means that items within
a module will depend on items defined below them, but not (usually) above them.
The idea here is that the public API, with more internal dependencies, will be
read (and changed) more often, and putting it closer to the top of the module
makes it more accessible.

This can be surprising to many engineers who are used to the bottom-up ordering
used in languages like Python, where items can have a run-time dependency on

> other items defined in the same module.

Reviewer: Is this paragraph carrying any weight? It reads like it's just throwing shade at Python.

Author: Fair enough, dropped it.

`get_()` prefixes are discouraged.

#### Enum variants

When implementing or modifying an `enum` type, list its variants in alphabetical
order. It's acceptable to ignore this advice when matching the order imposed by
an external source, e.g. a standards document.

Prefer active verbs for variant names. E.g. `Allow` instead of `Allowed`,
`Forbid` instead of `Forbidden`. Avoid faux-bools like `Yes` and `No`, instead
preferring variant names that are descriptive of the different states.

#### Don't elide generic lifetimes

We prefer not to elide lifetimes when naming types that are generic over
lifetimes. Always include a lifetime placeholder (e.g. `<'_>`) to avoid
confusion.

### Imports

We use 3 blocks of imports in our Rust files:

1. `std` imports
2. Imports from external crates
3. Crate-internal imports

We believe that this makes it easier to see where a particular import comes from.

Within the import blocks we prefer to separate imports that don't share a parent
module. For example,

```rust
// Incorrect
use alloc::{format, vec::Vec};

// Correct
use alloc::format;
use alloc::vec::Vec;
```

> We prefer to reference types and traits by an imported symbol name instead of

Reviewer: editorial:
```suggestion
We prefer to reference items by an imported symbol name instead of
```

using qualified references. Qualification paths generally add noise and are
unnecessary. The one exception to this is when the symbol name is overly
generic, or easily confused between different crates. In this case we prefer to
import the symbol name under an alias, or if the parent module name is short,
using a one-level qualified path. E.g. for a crate with a local `Error` type,

> prefer to `import std::error::Error as StdError`.

Reviewer: Should this say `use`?

Author: Yup, nice catch!

### Exports

We prefer to export types under a single name, avoiding re-exporting types from

> the top-level `lib.rs`. The exception to this are "paved path" exports that we

Reviewer: I don't think this is at all true for Quinn, and I'm pretty happy with that the way it is. We go to some effort exposing a flatter namespace than our internal code organization would naturally yield, regardless of how likely a typical downstream user is to need to name something. We do have some few public modules, but those are mostly limited to cases where all the types are very closely associated and might need a common prefix otherwise. The result is, IMO, substantially more ergonomic for users.

Author: Fair, cut this section on exports.

expect every user will need. The canonical example of such types are

> `client::ClientConfig` and `server::ServerConfig`. In general this sort of type

Reviewer: This example is confusing to a quinn user.

Author: Cut this section.

is rare and most new types should be exported only from the module in which they
are defined.

> ### Comments

Reviewer: Should we talk about non-doc comments?

Author: I don't think we really need to? They're not visible to the outside, so not as important.

> Crate items should have descriptive doccomments on them. These are required for

Reviewer: editorial: I'm skeptical of "doccomments" as one word.

Author: Expanded it to documentation comments.

any publicly exposed items.

All comments (doccomment or not) should be wrapped to 100 columns.

In addition to the conventions above, all doccomments should conform to
[Appendix A of Rust RFC 1574][1574-A].

[1574-A]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/1574-more-api-documentation-conventions.html#appendix-a-full-conventions-text

### Misc

#### Numeric literals

Prefer a numeric base that fits with the domain of the value being used. E.g.
use hexadecimal for protocol message literals, and octal for UNIX privileges.
Use digit grouping to make larger numeric constants easy to read, e.g. use
`100_000_000` instead of `100000000`.

#### Avoid type aliases

We prefer to avoid type aliases as they obfuscate the underlying type and
don't provide additional type safety. Using the
[newtype idiom](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/generics/new_types.html)
is one alternative when an abstraction boundary is worth the added complexity.

#### Type exhaustiveness

> Public enums should be marked as _either_ `#[non_exhaustive]` or `#[allow(clippy::exhaustive_enums)]`.

Reviewer: Do we need to turn this lint on in CI?

Author: I've dropped this section for now. Something we could look into in the future.

The latter is suitable for enums that are already complete by definition.  For example:
`enum CoinFlip { Heads, Tails }` is complete.  Err on the side of marking something `#[non_exhaustive]`.

The same applies to structs, with the detail that no manual marking is needed for
structures with at least one private field.

## Design and Architecture

Some general concepts about how the library should fit together:

- Linker friendliness
- Small mandatory API
- Safe and sensible defaults
- Separation of mechanism and policy

### Safe and sensible defaults

We should be confident to make decisions on behalf of our users and
express that in the [library's defaults][defaults].  It is good to
encode our experience of TLS in this way, and we should not require that
users are experts in TLS to end up with a result that is working,

> secure, stable, and performant.

Reviewer: Slightly odd elaboration for Quinn: while TLS is certainly a large part of what we must be wary of overwhelming the user with, there's much more beyond it. Maybe prefix "For example, it is good to ..."?

Author: I've dropped the section on linker friendliness, which I don't think is important for us.

If you believe you've found a security bug please
[open a draft security advisory](https://github.com/quinn-rs/quinn/security/advisories/new)
in GitHub, and not as a regular repository issue.

## AI policy

Using AI (LLMs) as tools for coding is welcome. A high bar is held for all contributions to this
project. Moreover, the project maintainers remain responsible for any code that is published as
part of a release. Contributors are expected to be responsible for any code they publish.

AI should not be used to generate comments when communicating with maintainers. Comments are
expected to be written by humans. Comments that are believed to be written by AI may be hidden
without notice.

If you are opening an issue, you should be able to describe the problem in your own words.

If you are opening a pull request, you are expected to be able to explain the proposed changes in
your own words. This includes the pull request body and responses to questions. Make sure you have
reviewed the PR yourself before submitting it for review to the maintainers. Do not copy responses
from the AI when replying to questions from maintainers.

> This project requires a human in the loop who understands the work produced by AI. Autonomous

Author: Someone I work with on other projects had questions about this part, in particular the second sentence, which seems fairly broad. Given that the constraints are pretty clearly enumerated in other paragraphs, perhaps this paragraph/sentence should be removed?

Reviewer: That sounds good to me. As written, this paragraph might cause confusion about people using agentic workflows to draft code locally, which we don't intrinsically object to.

Author: Dropped the paragraph.

agents are not allowed to be used for contributing to this project. Pull requests that appear in
violation of this will be closed, perhaps without notice.

If you wish to include context from an interaction with AI in your comments, it must be in a
quote block (using `>`) and disclosed as such. It must be accompanied by human commentary
explaining the relevance and implications of the context. Do not share long snippets.

AI is useful when communicating as a non-native English speaker. If you are using AI to edit your
comments for this purpose, please take the time to ensure it reflects your own voice and ideas.
When using AI for translation, we recommend writing in your native language and including the AI

> translation in a quote block.

Reviewer 2: This is very nice, might be worth putting higher up in this section.

Author: Hmm, not sure -- I think at the bottom is probably okay for this since the other points seem more relevant to most consumers.

## Code changes

Some ideas and guidelines for contributions:

- For large features, file an issue prior to starting work.
  This means everyone can see what is in progress prior to a PR.
- Feel free to submit a PR even if the work is not totally finished, for early feedback.

> - Prefer not to reference GitHub issue or PR numbers in commit messages.

Reviewer 2: Why is this? I've noticed consuming Quinn commits downstream that it is often a bit hard to find out the reasoning and motivation behind commits. Information that would be more readily available if issues and PRs were mentioned. Usually commit messages are not really part of the review process so they tend to be terse and rely on the PR context.

I'm not asking to change how you work, only curious how this practice came to be. Feel free to ignore :)

Author: The problem is that GitHub generates a lot of spam from these, so for example each rebase (as well as downstream merges) would generate a link in the linked issue, or, worse, a notification for the mentioned user.

Use digit grouping to make larger numeric constants easy to read, e.g. use
`100_000_000` instead of `100000000`.

#### Avoid type aliases

We prefer to avoid type aliases as they obfuscate the underlying type and
don't provide additional type safety. Using the
[newtype idiom](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/generics/new_types.html)
is one alternative when an abstraction boundary is worth the added complexity.

#### Type exhaustiveness

Public enums should be marked as _either_ `#[non_exhaustive]` or `#[allow(clippy::exhaustive_enums)]`.
The latter is suitable for enums that are already complete by definition.  For example:
`enum CoinFlip { Heads, Tails }` is complete.  Err on the side of marking something `#[non_exhaustive]`.

The same applies to structs, with the detail that no manual marking is needed for
structures with at least one private field.

## Design and Architecture

Some general concepts about how the library should fit together:

- Linker friendliness
- Small mandatory API
- Safe and sensible defaults
- Separation of mechanism and policy

### Linker friendliness

When a program incorporates rustls, we should try to ensure that parts

> that are not used can be discarded by the linker.

Reviewer 3: Either state that this is a copy of the CONTRIBUTING of rustls, or replace with quinn here?

Author: Dropped this section and made sure there are no references to rustls anymore.
